In my frame of reference, they're both speculative fiction.
There's an awful lot of discussion about this.
I don't think it's a very productive kind of a discussion.
It's practically everything.
There certainly is a fiction based upon cold, hard science.
There's no question about that.
And on the other hand, there's fiction based upon fairies and wizards.
But in general, most of the stories that you read are all based upon invented laws of science which aren't in evidence.
And it's a kind of a very difficult line of distinction to make here.
Now, as far as I got all this aside, I will say that I start even though I don't feel that I say that there's a very thin,
if any boundary between these two things.
In general, I think I start with a mood of the story rather than a plot or an easy sort.
I start with a mood of...
And then go on and flesh it out and put characters to the mood and atmosphere and background, stuff like that.
And in this mood, of course, takes account of the fact that the situations are more or less plausible and possible and credible.
Or that probably I could state that better by saying that the assumptions are more familiar.
Because given any assumptions, every story starts out with a set of assumptions which readers require to believe in.
And with so-called...
The closer the stuff is to pure science and the more familiar to the reader, or not to the reader so much,
with the more familiar to the scientific community is the assumptions.
And the closer you get to pure fantasy, then the more remote are the assumptions made.
But the assumptions are just less, or they're on the left.
You don't have these basic assumptions and you don't have any story.
Now, when was the first part of your question once more?
I answered the last.
Got what the first part was.
Okay, hold on one moment.
Yes, Mr. Vance, I ask how you proceeded from your ideas to a completed story.
Well, I can't answer that.
It's because I don't know myself.
It's just a matter of sitting down and working around an idea and putting...flushing it out, so to speak.
It's just the same way as if you were painting a landscape.
You'd take a pencil and maybe you would, maybe you would.
And draw in an outline of a tree in a house and then take up the color and start smearing green for the foliage
and circle of smoke coming out of the chimney of the house and geraniums in the window boxes.
In other words, you start in with a framework and then start elaborating upon it.
That's about the best I can tell you.
That suits you, doesn't it?
Oh, yes, very much.
We have another second person in here for a question.
All right, I prefer you to only ask one question at a time so I don't get confused.
Okay.
Mr. Vance, what method do you use to come up with the names for your characters and places?
This is a...I do it very carefully.
And it's not in and miss.
It is not just random picking a name on the phone but cut off.
What you're hearing in the background there, there's a gang of birds from cages right over here.
They hear me talking like this.
They get annoyed and they'll start yelling and screaming too.
You may hear them, I don't know.
But anyway, the names for the characters, they have to be such that they don't intrude on the reader's notice.
Every time he reads them, he says, I think that's strange.
What's strange, a name with all these odd-looking consonants and those...
The name has to be such that it'll flow along in the reading and not the reader's tongue won't trip over it every time he gets to it.
Still, you don't do it like it's a comic strip.
In a comic strip, the bad guys are always called Gnarr or Nash or something, you know.
That's really getting too basic.
You don't do it that way.
You do it in more subtle ways.
You possibly go back to the rips of the language, rips of either Germanic language or rips of Latin language.
And you come up with some kind of...
I'm not saying I do this overtly, but it's a subconscious process.
Then you kind of write down names that seem like they will fit this character and what he's supposed to do and what he's supposed to be.
Then after you take all these things into consideration, then you choose what names seem to fit.
And they say it's not just an easy matter, although quite often the name will just suddenly pop out and you know the name is right.
But in my opinion, it's a pretty important matter, this nomenclature.
It's nothing that if any of you people are would-be writers, I think you should pay a good deal of attention to it.
Because if you don't, it traps up the reader when it goes through your stories.
It's going to fall all over that name.
It's phony. You know, you can't have phony names in your story.
You can't have anything phony.
It all has to blend in and...
There you hear that bird?
Maybe not. Well, there's maybe a bird.
Anyway, that's the answer.
Okay, very good.
I have a question, but mine's a multiple question.
I'm sorry to ask you, but...
Well, ask a part of it.
I'll just ask a piece at a time.
Do you find science fantasy easier to write than science fiction?
What'd you say again?
Well, not particularly. It's all about the sea.
Okay, and do you find that you get more, I don't know, gratification and explaining in science fiction
than you would in science fantasy where you can run away on other aspects of the story?
Well, I...
When I was first starting out,
this was the age when science fiction was real.
Science fiction, you know, when John Campbell ran The Sounding Magazine
and he wanted science fiction to be science fiction.
And everybody was kind of slavishly running that route.
And I tried to for a bit, and I did some perfectly decent stories along those lines,
but I found that it was kind of tiresome.
A lot of the stories depended on some little-done trick of, oh, like, superconductivity.
Or, for instance, I wrote a story once on the idea that sea creatures sequestered rare elements, rare minerals from the ocean water
to build a story in this fact.
But I decided that this wasn't my... I didn't like doing it that way.
I wasn't really interested in writing stories about science.
I have a very good scientific background.
I know I know science, you know, so it's not that I'm ignorant,
but I like to work the science into the stories rather than write the stories about science,
if you see the distinction.
So the word science and science fiction maybe is...
Well, anyway, as the years went on, I just became...
The science became more cultural, anthropological science, if you want to put it that way.
If you're interested in science and that and all.
All right, what's the second question?
No, you covered everything pretty well. Thank you. That was a very good answer.
Okay, next question.
Okay.
Mr. Vance.
Speaking.
What makes you rat? What inside do you make you take?
No, that is a very personal question.
I don't even see any reason why I should answer it.
Not because I'm shy, but that's...
That's...
Well, I could ask the same of you.
What's inside you? What makes you tick? What makes you go to school?
Why do you study? Why do you survive?
I was getting that...
The question I... Let's go on to another question.
Okay. Why do you rat? Is it money?
I don't want to answer that question. That's my business.
Okay, that's fair enough.
Next question.
Okay, it takes a moment to filter the minute out of the room without even getting feedback from the speaker phone system here.
Okay, we got the next guy here. Ready?
Mr. Vance, in this story, the sun is red.
And I was wondering how you could have that considering when the sun...
When our sun will be red, the earth will be inside the sun.
This is here, fantasy here.
This is... Well, it's not necessarily so, because there are dwarf red stars that are smaller than the current sun here now.
I think the progression of the sun, though, first it gets to be a very large giant red sun that shrinks.
I think that's the sequence.
But still, still and all, these particular stories to which you refer,
there are essentially fantasy stories.
And the background is magic. I deal with magic in the stories.
If I have to worry about whether or how big the sun is, I might as well worry about how magic works, or worry about any other things.
That's just one of the assumptions which we are asked to accept, to deal with, and bring the star.
Here's the earth is so old, the sun has become old and red.
Now, I'm not absolutely certain whether the sun can become a dwarf red star if we have to go that route without becoming a giant red star.
It may well be that the sun possibly could become a dwarf star.
Although in these stories, I generally assume the sun is a little larger in diameter than it is now.
So it wouldn't exactly be a dwarf star.
But again, this is just decoration in the story.
There's no scientific justification for it.
Any more scientific justification for the ideas of magic?
Next question.
Mr. Vance, in your book The Dying Earth, what happened to civilization as we know it?
Once again, please louder.
In your book The Dying Earth, what happened to civilization as we know it?
Well, when? When the sun goes off?
Before that, you start to book off and there's a agenda of the mirror.
Don't forget, this is many, many billion years, according to the story, and there's been many different civilizations up, down, civilizations wiped out.
I usually think that I talk about there being...
In fact, to tell you the truth, I've seen an inconsistency.
One of my books I referred to, 43 eons, A, E, O, N, S.
In another one of my books, I only deal with 21 eons.
So I made a blunder there.
I forgot how many eons I was using.
And an eon is what you can call anything you like.
But during this time span, civilizations have come and gone a hundred thousand different times.
So what we have at this time, this period, are little fragments of life scattered around the so-called dying Earth.
That's not my title. I didn't give the book that title, incidentally.
I called it something else.
But to tell you the truth, I've forgotten what I did call it.
But by and large, the Earth of this particular time is kind of a wasteland, where a few isolated cities or collections or plots of people still...
still live together for various reasons.
But the great civilizations are all gone. They're in the past.
This is a time when people kind of wander around through the ruins.
That's the misdying Earth, particular New York, Mobile, atmosphere, whatever you want to call it.
Next question.
What happened to mankind as we know it? Did they waste away or did they disappear?
Well, you read the books. I think it's all impressive in the books.
Next question.
Okay.
Okay, in books like the Dying Earth, is there any importance or relevance to the manner in which the characters speak?
One thing I must say. You're asking a lot of questions about the Dying Earth.
This story was written long, long, long, long time ago.
And I don't know how old your people are. They're asking questions.
But I probably wasn't a great deal older than you were. I presume you're in your 20s. That's my guess.
I wrote a lot of this stuff while I was a seaman, board ship. I was a deckhand able to seaman.
And for a long time I couldn't get them published.
And I had these things just on my files, you might say, for quite a while.
But now these things are some of my first written works.
Now, I've written an enormous amount of stuff since, which I personally like better than the Dying Earth.
I think the Dying Earth, although many people like these books, and I guess they must have had a lot of color and a lot of drive to them.
I've been told this. But we seem to be focusing a great deal on the Dying Earth, which is alright.
I don't mind. Ask all about it, you want. I'll answer you.
I've written other books besides that. I just want to point this out.
Now, this Dying Earth thing, I forgot your question. What was your question again?
He was just asking a question about the style. It seems to be that the people in the book all speak with the same sort of...
Yeah, well, see, now this was a... I wrote this when I was rather young.
And I was trying to achieve a consistency of tone.
Now, for instance, let me put it this way. If you're building a house in Texas, you're not going to bring down some igloos from Alaska,
or some mosques from Turkey to put on the property.
And you're not going to have the people that work for you speak in Yiddish or Polynesian.
You're all going to be... The house and the people that live there are going to be talking in Texas, type language.
The house is going to be Texas-style. You're going to have Texas-style cows.
And eat Texas chili. And I hope you don't use that hated tomato in your chili, because I'm on that edge of the conflict
that believes that tomato is poisonous when it goes in the chili.
Anyway, what I'm trying to say is that what I'll be too facetious here is that I tried to make the conversation
consistent with the dialogue, consistent with the whole atmosphere.
Right? Anyway, essentially that's the answer. No more, no less.
Whether I succeed it, that's for you to say.
Okay, Mr. Vance, let's... Before we let you go, I want to ask you a few about lioness.
One of your later works. Is that okay? Do you have time for a couple on that?
Yes, call it right. I'm not doing anything. You're sitting here.
Okay, is it okay if we record this in case maybe we can get a couple of radio shows out of it and send you the tapes?
Would that be okay?
Sure, go ahead.
Okay. We understand there was a delay in the Underwood Miller edition coming out.
Can you tell us why that was?
Yes, I can. It's just not considered polite for putting them, Berkeley putting them,
did not necessarily have to let allow Tim Underwood to publish the lioness at all.
See, it's not my contract that allows Tim Underwood to publish these things,
but they kindly, politely, graciously allowed Tim to publish 500 copies hardcover,
but they wanted to have their version out first so that the reviews, such as they were, would specify the book was by Berkeley putting them, rather than Underwood Miller book.
So Tim delayed his publication until the Berkeley putting them book hit the stand.
There's just a matter of not only courtesy, but it's a good consideration, but it's just good common sense,
because if you didn't play it that way, they'd never allow Tim to the same privileges again.
In other words, they didn't have to allow him to publish the thing at all.
They just said, go ahead, sure, you know, the book 500 copies is okay.
So it's just a matter of courtesy, business courtesy between the two publishers,
and Tim agreed to delay his publishing until their book hit the stand.
In other words, there won't be any differences at all in the two editions then?
No, there's no differences. They're the same text.
It's just that, no, there's just no differences.
It's just that one is hardcover, it's got a beautiful, it's got a different cover, and it's signed, but the text is the same.
I didn't write two books, no.
No way.
Okay, listen, how long have you been planning Lion-S? Is that a pretty recent plan, or did you go way back with that?
Well, oddly enough, I had that thing in my mind ever since I've been 12 years old.
That kind of a story.
It wasn't like Lion-S, or it wasn't plotted out this way, but...
But I had that mood with the idea of the story taking place in and around this forest, and with these kind of people.
And the fact that I even started writing some stories about that when I was just a little kid, 12, 14, I don't know how old I was.
They got thrown away, I don't know what happened in the end, please.
But then I tell you the truth, I just forgot about it over the years, and then recently I decided I'd try to book along these lines.
And I instantly thought of this construction, or this background which I developed back when I was so little, you know, back so long ago.
And that's where the thing, I will say, ultimately derives there, because it's certainly just a kind of a notion that all the flesh out of it is recent.
But anyway, that's more or less what happened.
Okay, I know you have a great deal of, maybe not actual history, but legend, established legend dealing with the Irish and English and so forth.
How much in your estimation was actual history a legend that she uses as a framework?
Well, the Irish and the English and the Welsh have all in their folklore speak of these islands off the coast of English, south of England.
They call them High Brazil, H-Y-I-F-B-R-A-S-I-D-L, High Brazil.
And this is fairly, I haven't read that old much reading in the original sources by the means.
But it's fairly clear that these things are just legends without any basis of fact.
The people of oceanographers have studied the ocean floor.
Out in this area here they find no signs of any submerged islands or anything of this sort.
They're primarily looking for Atlantis, which is of course Atlantis is much, the site of Atlantis is much farther than south.
Atlantis is supposed to be off Gibraltar, near to where, well there's nothing out there now, but it's between the Azores and Gibraltar.
But these elder isles would be about where I've placed them.
There's always been these references to Avalon in the, the, the lost city east, YS, has been placed, this is more or less for the French folklore.
This has been off the coast of Cornwall generally speaking, in the French literature.
But I took some liberties there and I put it on the other side of the elder isles.
Leon S is, again, lost Leon S is the subject I believe of, well I think Debussy wrote a, I think Debussy wrote a piece called The Sunken Cathedral.
So Cathedral was supposed to be the Cathedral of Los Leonesa City, and that was supposed
to be off Cornwall somewhere.
But there isn't any, any firm or definite references really that you could point to
and say, here is the geography.
The geography is something which I took some liberties to, mainly on the basis of these
references to the island of High Brazil.
And I called, I removed the, well, just called the island of Hybris, which you'll notice
in a minute.
Yeah, okay, I think I know the answer to this, but maybe if you do clarify it, the, the which,
I think it's pronounced as May, changes into three things.
Melanxi was the first, the third was burned.
And I guess the second one was, was Carfilio, right?
Well, there's two, yeah, there's three, there were three products for, but then I don't
really want to discuss, this is something you have to read and derive for yourself.
This is something that the author shouldn't have to explain.
But there, there were three products from that, from the destruction of the which does
may, yes, there were.
And it's all, as I recall, stated there pretty categorically what happened.
Yeah, no, I think it was too.
Okay.
Okay, you put book one on the title page of Lien S. I assume then you have a good deal
more material regarding that.
True.
I'm, I'm working on it, working on it right now, matter of fact.
Actually, I'm not, I'm kind of assembling it, but I'm also doing, I'm doing something
on another book at the moment that I've got a contract for and I've got to get out.
I've just finished a, a Krugel book, which is a, I'd call it a sequel if you like, to
a book called Eyes of the Overworld, which is not, again, not my title.
I didn't call it that, but some editor decided that was a good name.
They used it.
So I've finished that, that'll be out in November.
Then I've got this thing I've worked on now, I've got to get out.
Then after that's out, then I'll do number two, and if I get good profit contracts, I'll
do number three at the same time.
I guess, in other words, it's all kind of up in the air.
I have to wait and see if the publisher says, publishes his Vance.
That book was a disaster.
I just want to see no more of it, and I'll stop writing it, but I don't think so.
Hope not anyway.
Mr. Vance is the, the new Krugel book.
Is it a sequel to Eyes of the Overworld, or is it a sequel to A Quest for Symbolus?
And will A Quest for Symbolus...
No, that quest for Symbolus has got nothing to do with me.
Right, but it was Krugel and...
Well, that's Michael Shae's book.
No, I never even read the thing.
No, um...
That answers the question.
The, the, uh...
My book is a sequel to The Original Eyes of the Overworld.
What's the title of this new Krugel one going to be?
Does it have one yet?
Uh, if I'm not mistaken, Dave Hartwell of Simon and Schuster, I think he's, again, calling it title, I don't like very much.
I think he's calling it the Krugel Sega S-A-G-A, which I don't think is a good title, and that...
Writers don't have an awful lot of clout when it comes to deciding what the title's going to be.
But that'll be the name, just at present, that's the name.
It'll be out in November, as I mentioned.
Is it too early to tell how Lee and S is selling?
I hear it's selling pretty good, but I don't know exactly how good.
I've just heard here and there, you know, that seems to be selling pretty good.
How does it seem to be selling down your... into the woods?
Yeah, pretty well.
We were just at a convention, AggieCon, in College Station, Texas, and the copies they had there, they sold.
The ones that, I guess, were hot off the press had been sold.
And we bought the Underwood Miller copies here, two of us have.
Uh-huh.
Listen, I was going to pass along some information about Mexico.
Are you still going?
Well, yeah, I'd sure like to, if I could get enough time together.
I had a friend who was just down there, and he said the exchange rate is $148 to a dollar,
and you'd get some fantastic bargains and everything.
Where did the exchange at, at the border, or in Mexico?
Down in Mexico.
I think he went to Chihuahua City mostly is where he was, and he did the exchange down there.
Uh-huh.
But he said the fantastic bargains, food, lodging, everything.
Yeah.
So if you go down there, you ought to have a good time with the money, anyhow.
I'd like to go down to Chihuahua and take that train over to the coast.
You heard about that?
Yeah, oh yeah.
That's great trip.
Copper Canyon, I think it's called.
Yeah, they call it Copper Canyon.
Yeah.
Well, listen, Mr. Vance, I'm done with you.
I'm going to turn you over to David here.
He's got a favor to ask you, but I appreciate very much your time.
And we're looking forward to your future books.
And just a second now, David wants to ask you one thing before you go.
All right.
Okay, Mr. Vance, it doesn't look like we're going to make it out to any of the cons in
the West Coast anytime soon.
And I was wondering if we, a few of us here at the radio show might send you some books
in the mail for you to sign and get you to return them if we put return postage in there.
Well, I've had so damn much trouble doing that.
You know, that it's trouble for my wife, really.
She's had so much agony going through that, signing books, taking them to the post office,
and then people not sending enough postage that I just kind of decided I wasn't going to do that anymore.
I don't mean to be churlish about it, but it just makes a god damn much worth around here,
is it?
This?
Well, I'll make an exception just once more.
But you make sure.
Damn well sure you got enough postage.
Okay?
Oh, no problem.
We'll send...
And get all the return.
In other words, I don't mind doing this much.
If I don't have to scroll around and find all the stuff to send it back here.
Now, we got that down to a science.
You'll just stick the label on, stick the stamps on, and dump it back in the mail.
Then there's no problem.
But I've had time and time again people send stuff here.
And it's just cause no end to problems.
But if you make it easy, then I don't mind doing it.
I certainly don't mind signing your books right now.
Okay, now we've done this quite a bit because it's kind of hard.
If you know where we are, we're in the middle of absolutely nowhere.
And it's hard to get out to some cons.
So we've found that this works probably easiest for us.
Where is Odessa in connection with, say, El Paso?
If you draw a line between El Paso and Dallas, that line would be nearly 400 miles long.
Right in the middle of that line is Odessa.
I see.
Cause we're just thinking, just if we have some friends in New Mexico,
chances are conceivable that we might drive down through El Paso down into Chihuahua.
Yeah, it's going out through Oroes and whatnot.
That's a pretty common route, yeah.
Yeah.
Although, I don't know, it's a long, long way.
Yeah, I myself, I've never been to Mexico.
I really hadn't thought about it, but with the exchange rate the way it is,
it seems like it would be quite the time.
It's a shame not taking advantage of it.
Yeah, I was just thinking the same thing.
I might change my summer vacation plans here.
How many people in your class?
There are about 25 people in the class.
What are their ages, right?
Or ages run anywhere from 18 to the early 30s?
Uh-huh, yeah.
Yeah, you were pretty right on the mark on your answer back there when you were,
when they were asking about the dying earth.
Yeah, yeah, I hate to talk about that.
That seems to be, you know, it's something that, since it was all right,
but that's so long ago, you know, I hate to be waste no time talking about that thing
when I've got a lot of other stuff since then that I think deserves more comment than that thing.
But it's all right, I'm not putting it down.
Why should I, you know, make money for me?
Yeah, yeah, I think what it is, it's been around for such an amount of time
that it's really getting in the air of being sort of a classic.
Yeah, that's right.
You know, kind of like Bradbury's something wicked this way comes.
You know, we've taught them all both books
and we tend to look at them in the same light.
You may just be burdened with having a classic on your hands.
Well, as long as, as long as it doesn't cost me money, I don't mind.
No, I don't, I don't work the other way around.
Well, no, I'm just joking.
Yeah, yeah.
Are you going to World Fantasy Con this next year?
No.
Okay.
I don't go to any con connections unless I get a big red carpet laid out from year to there
with maidens, with fans along the way and people offering me beer at every ten steps.
You know, that kind of stuff.
If you get offered a con like that, could you let us know we might just want to come watch?
Well, I generally don't even go to any conventions in the States too, with exceptions,
but I like to go to foreign conventions because I, you know, I get to travel four and three,
although I find that it costs me just about as much as it would if I was paying my own way.
Well, not quite, but I generally don't go to conventions in the States at all.
I just generally, generally outside the States.
Last year with that Australia, that was a lot of fun.
And that's the way it goes.
Okay, well listen, Mr. Vance, we appreciate you taking time out to talk with us and everything
and the guys in the class really did appreciate it.
I don't know.
I'm happy to help you and your work.
Give me a call if you have any other problems.
Okay, okay, we appreciate it.
We'll be in touch and we'll send you those books and we'll make sure to send enough return postage and everything.
All right, period.
Okay, thank you again, sir.
Bye-bye.